thank you very much for joining us for
the program this evening
and of course thanks to you for joining
us at home and for watching and if you
want to join in the conversation
you do in the usual way at bbc question
time on social media and let's hear what
you've got to say
right we'll start with our first
question which is from
mike jones acciona as boris johnson
has announced severe tier levels in
england
should we all just be as strict as
possible and buckle down to avoid
another spike early in the new year
tany do you want to start us off
yeah i think this is incredible i think
the good thing about christmas
is that everyone has agreed on what we
should be doing in terms of lockdown i
think the
guidance is really important but the
tier system
is a reaction to the r rate going up um
and i think it is important my worry
over christmas
is that it will just get very
complicated and january february march
could be
a huge lockdown for everybody i think
people are tired they're exhausted
we're not you know working from home
we're living at work
um and the mental health pressures on
people are going to be huge
so it's incredibly important that i
think people are just really sensible
over christmas
um you know we're not going to be stupid
they have to take some personal
responsibility of this but we are
a long way from getting a vaccine and
being out of this
on the other side um and
i think it's quite hard actually when
every part of the country
potentially has different levels to
actually understand what you can and you
can't do
because the guidance gets quite
complicated in terms of crossing borders
and regions and areas and i know where i
live we were told
you know previous lockdown that you know
it was county durham and then it turned
out it was
the durham county so i think everyone's
going to be really really clear on what
those measures mean to individuals
and you're in tier three uh as of as of
next week
uh tani um nadeem
the question should we all be as strict
as possible and i mean 99
of england is under tier two and tier
three now i mean is this
another lock down by another name well
so if you look at
tier 2 and t3 you're absolutely right
they've been tightened up but retail
will reopen people can go to the gym
clearly there are differences when
people should obviously look at governor
uk to see where their area is
they are tougher the r number has been
coming down so it's now
between 1 and 1.1 it was 1.3 before the
national interventions in england were
introduced
which will end on the 2nd of december
and then this new tiering system
will apply uh look i think the
combination of
community testing which we saw really
work well in liverpool and liverpool
is a great example of the local
leadership working with
the government to get this right they've
in tier two
which is i think a positive in other
areas
uh like my area sadly in in the west
midlands
we are in tier three and although
stratford-on-haven has a low
uh infection rate per hundred thousand
the surrounding area of solihull
and north warwickshire is much higher so
we've had to go into tier three
and can i ask you about the mass testing
because the prime minister gave a press
conference today
at five o'clock and he said the previous
tier systems
um slowed down infection rates mass
testing
could allow individuals to be released
from certain restrictions
even if they're living in tier three
what did he mean by that did he mean
that
it's just about individuals it's not
everyone in tier three coming out of it
in a particular region but
individuals within tier three could get
a test and then
what so have people around or what do
you know so the pilot that was run
in liverpool which i think is really
important is
if you are then tested every day
for five days if you are someone who's
been notified through test and trace
of somebody that has the infection that
you've been close to
then you don't have to quarantine that's
that
and that's a big change so the people
who are in tier three as of next week
just be clear because this was new
information this afternoon
people that's 23 million people if
they're in tier three next week
they have to be what tested for five
days in a row and then they're free to
do what they want or what did he mean
exactly the
the pilot um that was running liverpool
was around so if you're notified um that
you've been in contact with someone who
has tested positive for coronavirus
at the moment you would have to
quarantine as the prime minister's doing
if you as we did in libya isn't that a
different thing though
just to make it really clear because it
really struck me if the prime minister's
saying
mass testing could allow individuals to
be released from certain restrictions
even when they're in tier three
he's saying that people who have what a
negative test
can live in a different way to those who
haven't had a negative test
in t or haven't even been tested at all
in tier three is that what he means no i
think the restriction is the
is the quarantine issue so if you are
as we have just done in liverpool if you
get notified
you have to quarantine therefore further
restrictions on your ability to move
around
if you get a test every day and you test
negative
every day then you don't have to
quarantine that is being delivered
through this
this pilot of community testing and
we're going to but that's true
everywhere that's not just
that that's what he was just remembering
the reason he's referring to tier three
is because we're focusing community
testing i think on tier three areas
claire should we all be as strict as
possible and buckle down
when we um were told that we had to
accept the lockdown
which a lot of people felt very unhappy
about and felt that there was not enough
evidence for
a national lockdown it was very much on
the assumption that we would leave the
lockdown and things might have improved
the reality is that over 23 million
people
have now who had previously been living
under
tier 1 gone into lockdown have now come
out in higher tiers
it feels like perpetual punishment and
even the way we're talking about it you
know are kind of
released from certain uh restrictions
you know whether the prime minister will
allow us and
if we buckle down and then we can have
christmas and the whole discussion
around
christmas has been very much you know
well we are going to indulge you
people who want their christmas with
their families for five days
but you're gonna pay for it and i'm
afraid that the
problem for me with this whole
discussion is
that we are free we're supposed to live
in a free society in a democracy
but we're behaving as though we are in a
pre-democratic time with some kind of
fiefdom announcing and micromanaging
exactly what we should do
so i think it's the opposite of getting
consent of bringing about
trust of encouraging people to take
themselves seriously because we are
literally having discussions of like
this technocratic
would it mean this does it mean that
should i dot the eye or cross the t
but given that we're in a pandemic
what's the alternative yes but there are
ways of dealing with pandemics lots of
different
possibilities you saw the response from
liverpool and the community in liverpool
and people actually
coming out and working together and
they've done really well
but that's the right way social
solidarity requires
that people do not believe that
arbitrarily their freedoms are taken
away from them and that there's no
balance of risks
the only thing that we face at the
moment is not you know you say we're in
a pandemic we're in a pandemic
we also undoubtedly will talk about the
economy
that pandemic is one of the things
facing this society
as are very many others and the way
we've responded to that pandemic
has created a tsunami a pandemic
of unemployment of immigration
of isolation of the robbing of autonomy
and of our freedoms and of our civil
liberties
and at the very least i should be able
to say that without the inference being
that i have not noticed we're living in
a pandemic
i think it's important and i think also
by the way many of the local authorities
that are now going to higher tiers
there's actually falling rates of
coronavirus
death rates are going down in relation
to
what they were so what i'm saying is is
that we're told if only we accept
this particular hard measure all we'll
be well well we've just had a lock down
we're not even out of it
and now we've been told we're going to
have hard tearing and you've got to
behave otherwise we won't have christmas
and then at christmas you've got to be
sensible because otherwise you're going
to pay for it it's not some sort of
religious cult we've entered into
and the one thing that nobody discusses
is what this does
for freedom and democracy in society and
i really think that's
a very serious price depend should at
least be debated fully
well let's see what our audience are
thinking in swansea jenna
yes thank you um i just wanted to say i
i don't really see how these tiers work
at all i think we're in a tia system and
then that resulted in it's going into
um another lock down on the fire break
here in wales i think the
lockdown in march was far more effective
because there was one rule for everybody
we knew what we had to do
but with all these different tiers i
just think it you know it adds confusion
and
i'm from a small valley where there's
been a spike in cases and i think we
need to be protecting those areas where
keys are low
to make sure we don't get any cases
escalated in those areas
claire thank you fiona
um i think it is all very confusing i
think it's all open to interpretation
and it all boils down to trust i think
trust is really really important
here in wales the locked out the fire
break lockdown clearly worked
numbers were falling 10 consecutive days
numbers were falling
and um and then recently numbers have
started
to increase and that's mainly in the
under-25s group
and i think that the message has to go
out loud and clear that
everybody has a part to play and and
trust is key
trust is essential so everybody needs to
take part and do their bet and of course
you're living under different rules in
wales claire are you saying they're
confusing
our i think our rules in wales um are
quite straightforward actually but
listening to all the different tier
systems
and where you can go and where you can
eat and where you can
go to socialize and who can socialize
listening to some of my friends and
colleagues in the different tier systems
in england
it's um it's quite baffling at times and
i think even they're confused
so um i think we need clarity and
michael michael b hello thank you
i just want to say is it really worth
the potential oppression and depression
that
spending family spending time with the
family over christmas that we could lead
into a potential third wave of
coronavirus is it really worth
that potential risk so as far as your
concern would be better to stay apart at
christmas
i think so yes because i think we're
coming into january it's probably one of
the most depressing months
in the year and then we'll probably be
going into a into another lockdown
is that is that really worth it for
spending a few days with family
vaughn von getting well these are
incredibly difficult
choices for all of us whether we're
members of public going about living our
lives
frontline health and care staff people
looking after us all and indeed
for decision makers like me and i can
tell you that as a
health minister with some responsibility
for more than three million souls here
in wales
there's nothing glib we're not looking
to take away people's liberties
we're looking to do the right thing to
keep well safe and to protect as many
lives as possible
the rules are only part of that what
we're really trying to do is to help
people to think about what we should do
the fire break did work
it did significantly reduce the numbers
of infections
that's then flat line that is starting
to rise again
and as we see that extra mixing those
extra cases that means more people
coming into a hospital ultimately means
more people who won't come out of
hospitals
and the infections that are rising in
under 25s will eventually translate into
people over the age of 16 they're much
more likely to come to harm
so our reach our real challenge is
understanding how people behave how we
help to people to make different choices
and to accept that we can't micromanage
every situation
but our responsibility to be clear about
what we want people to do and there are
times we set
harder rules about what can happen we've
got a much bigger testing program now
than we had at the start
and here in wales we've got a very
effective test trace protect system
that in the last week up to 92 percent
of index cases
and 85 percent of their contacts and
vaughan you talked
you talked about the fact that cases are
beginning to rise again
i mean looking at blind gwent for
example you've got 410 cases per hundred
thousand
um but two households can meet pubs and
restaurants are open where is it
in manchester for example there are 250
cases per hundred thousand pubs and
restaurants
are shut except for takeaway you i know
that you've been meeting today to talk
about next steps the welsh government
are you envisaging tighter restrictions
going forward
it's entirely possible and that isn't
because it's something that i celebrate
i never came into politics to intervene
in the way people live their lives in
this sort of way
but if we don't do something then as i
say we'll witness
and we'll stand by while people are
coming to harm and we can't do that
the response of the government is to
care for the people we're responsible
for the people that we serve
and i've already indicated the start of
this week we're looking at the potential
for different national measures
and i always said as the first minister
did going into the fire break we hope to
get to the end of the year
but if case numbers move in the wrong
direction we may have to do something
different
and it's entirely possible we'll have to
do that the cabinet will meet again
during the day tomorrow and we'll have
some decisions to make
all of those decisions will be how we
take care of ourselves
and each other and i would continue to
keep well safe and in that
the reason we've been able to have some
success in what we've done with the fire
break
is because people have responded to the
measures we've taken the leaders we've
given
but we still need to do more together in
this great national efforts against the
pandemic
public health teams but also the
economic okay i need to
i need to bring the rest of palinville
thank you adam
yeah and clearly the welsh government
does have some difficult decisions to
make in
in in the next few days and you know i i
think and how do you think this decision
should go
well look i mean the first thing i think
none of this is easy and i mean
i think claire is is right uh that
there is a balance there's a balance of
harms always and risks here that we have
to that has to be considered
uh but clearly um the position that you
don't want to be in
is uh to see that exponential rise in
cases again and particularly you know
we uh if the current restrictions
it would seem are not going to be enough
to keep
that level the prevalence of the disease
down and then you're in a very dangerous
position where you could see
a rise in cases leading to a rise in
hospitalization throughout december
uh as we get to christmas when you have
the easing in order to allow people to
get to together so
what's your response to michael's
question is it should we all just be as
strict as possible and buckle down
absolutely i think the point that the
the the um
the audience has made actually in terms
of the importance of trust
the importance of clear communication
and underlining the fact that
governments have an important role there
are certain things that only governments
can do and the rules and the regulations
the restrictions are part of that
but actually we will only defeat this
virus if we all play our part you know
that's the
the real truth of the situation
lockdowns should only ever be a last
resort
option when you you have to do that
because
of this exponential rise the way we
suppress the virus is if we keep to
those simple rules of avoiding
wherever possible you know close contact
in crowded situations
that so we all have a contribution to
make clearly the government
is going to have to make some difficult
decisions the one plea
is if they are looking at introducing
similar tier 3 like restrictions and
hospitality
we have to provide the economic support
so we've got to align the health policy
with the economic policy so for closing
businesses
i would like to see the welsh government
providing a higher level of support to
the
those businesses to help them
effectively to hibernate yet to survive
through this difficult period
you know there is some light at the end
of the tunnel isn't we are going to get
through this
but let's save lives and save save
livelihood so let's make sure that we
have the health and the
economic policy working in tandem and
that goes for the self-employed as well
self-employed have been badly let down
by the uk government okay so i'd like to
see the welsh government going
uh going better and helping those people
that have fallen between the two i need
to bring the audiences as well who are
sitting here very patiently hannah
i just wanted to say that i agree with
the point i think it was michael made
about is it worth it
just for a few days at christmas you
know we're talking about cases rising it
looks like cases are going to arrive
through december and yet the green
light's been given to people to meet
at christmas time regardless of where
we're at at that point and is it is it
really worth it a lot of us don't want
to yet we're all going to pay for it in
january either way
okay rachel hi um
i just feel that the the devolved
governments have done
so much better job of passing messages
on
than the westminster government has done
i think it's been quite a learning
opportunity for westminster if only they
would actually pay attention to what the
devolved governments are doing
peter i think it's important that
um we as a country all work together
to reduce the risk to the most
vulnerable
and if that means that we have to forgo
time at christmas with the ones that we
love then i think that's
that is something that we should all do
for the greater good
yeah okay briefly claire yes yeah i i
think
we all want to protect the vulnerable
but one of the problems with a lot of
the lockdown measures and that includes
tiering systems
is the very people who are being
neglected all the vulnerable
i mean you can't visit people in care
homes they are lonely
mrs smith in number 16 can't get any
visitors
people with dementia in her care homes
are dying
because they're not being stimulated
they've got no attention
there's the vulnerable are actually
being neglected
by our attempts at protecting the voters
you can visit care homes in wales it's
worth pointing out given that our
audience
yes but it's also the case that there's
been massive restrictions on visits on
care homes and wells i'm from wales
and no people in care homes the misery
the terror the horror the loneliness
we're making it sound as though
and and then people have said well don't
let us have christmas then
i i think we have to people don't have
to have christmas if you don't want to
feel free
and i think that we have to consider
what it is we consider to be important
about what it means to be alive
how we relate to people what our
relationships are like with people
and i think that just seeing it through
covered eyes
only means that we neglect the hugely
important social aspects
of protecting people of sociability
civility young people are having their
lives thwarted and
you know people kind of talk about them
going out and wanting to go and have a
drink
as the most irresponsible thing in the
world and then we infantilize people in
the process so my
because we don't trust them so when
people say about trust you can't have
trust if you then say
but if you break the rules you'll be
fined and you'll be accrued
of killing granny you've got to actually
trust people
and that requires a different approach
to this and i think it would
actually be beneficial to the vulnerable
to adopt that well something
very quickly we're piloting
um schemes in 20 care homes of how we
can get
um two visits in through testing
and of course the weekly testing of care
staff and the monthly testing of
residents and i have to give a shout out
to i'm a patron of charity called
kissing it better which gets young
people
to go to care homes through the covered
crisis than before
to perform to sing outside and has made
a huge difference
you